# How COVID Changed Us All: A Conversation with Eric Klinenberg

*Originally published in Vital City, February 13, 2024*
[Read the article here](https://www.vitalcitynyc.org/articles/eric-klinenberg-interview)

## On the sociologist’s new book ‘2020: One City, Seven People, and the Year Everything Changed’

COVID-19 spread throughout the world — and New York City — in 2020, causing massive disruption to societies, institutions and governments and leaving tens of millions dead and disabled. Because the virus is now considered endemic (part of everyday life), public health experts like me recommend using proven tools, such as vaccines, drugs, masks and ventilation to keep people healthy. But what is the therapy for the civic sickness that the pandemic also caused? In his new book, [“2020: One City, Seven People, and the Year Everything Changed,”](https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/704968/2020-by-eric-klinenberg/) sociologist Eric Klinenberg explores what brought us to a different type of long COVID, “a social disease that intensified a range of chronic problems and instilled the belief that the institutions we’d been taught to rely on are unworthy of our trust.”

Klinenberg does this through a unique and powerful combination of sociological analysis and narrative, exploring the lives of New Yorkers who experienced the pandemic and reacted to it in different ways.

Klinenberg’s approach is both rigorous and empathic, seeking to explore how individual perspectives and cultural forces shaped how people responded then and now to COVID.

I recently talked with Klinenberg about his book and what it means for the future of politics, health, cities and society. This transcript has been edited for clarity and length.

---

**Jay Varma:** You’ve described this book as a social autopsy of the year 2020. You referenced using the year 2020 as a title, both as a reference to the calendar year and also as an allusion to looking at something with clarity and acuity. What made you focus on 2020 as opposed to the past three years of COVID-19?

**Eric Klinenberg:** I think 2020 was an especially powerful and formative moment in the same way that we sometimes think we develop as people from all of our experiences, but there’s something especially formative about early experiences. I think that’s true for this crisis as well. 2020, it seems to me, was not just a single crisis, it was a series of cascading crises. The pandemic, the assault on democracy, the murder of George Floyd, the spike in violence, the abandonment of cities. We really went through a lot, and it’s my view that we were traumatized. Again, some of us as adults get through our traumas by repressing them. There’s this great sociological concept called “the will not to know.” I think we’ve repressed what we went through in 2020. To our collective detriment, we’ve repressed it because so much happened to us that changed us. I’ve just written [this essay](https://www.nytimes.com) about the fact that long COVID is not just a medical condition, it’s also a social disease. I think there are all kinds of signs that we’re still suffering from it today.

**JV:** You highlight this challenge of dire yet distant threats a lot at the very beginning of your book, how a principal in Chinatown is already hearing about the dangers through the families in their school. I’m curious about how you think of dire yet distant threats now compared to then.

**EK:** One of the first ideas in the book actually comes from something I was teaching at the time. I’m a sociologist; I teach at New York University. In the early days of the pandemic, as it happened, I was teaching a course on the social challenges of climate change. It’s a big lecture course I teach often, and I generally talk early in the course about this thing social scientists call “the paradox of cognition.” The paradox is that it’s very difficult for us to get excited and exercised by threats that might be existential and profound, but are a little bit remote, more remote than the car that’s about to hit us or the guys across the street carrying a baseball bat or the spike in crime or immigration or what have you. Climate change really suffers from this problem. It always feels like it’s this major issue, but not today. It’s not the most important thing for me today. By the time it becomes the most urgent thing on our minds, it would probably be too late to do anything significant about it.

When I brought up this subject in class, I asked people in January, February 2020, for example, how many of you are concerned about this new coronavirus that they found in China? When I first asked that question, what came back to me were 50 blank stares and one student who raised his hand. I asked him how he knew about it, and it turned out he was Chinese. Not Chinese-American, he literally had just gotten off a plane from China, somehow was one of the first people to get out, he’d come to New York to do study abroad.

I kept asking that question over the course of the next several weeks and gradually more people raised their hands until it was the only thing happening to us, and in fact, it was such an urgent thing that the school closed, our economy closed, people had to go back home. Obviously, our lives changed in profound ways.

I think the pandemic was a very hard thing for us to get our heads around for a very long time. It took a while for it to register. We refused to accept it, and unfortunately, one of the chief people who suffered from that delusion was the president of the United States at the time, which made it much more difficult to respond.

**JV:** This is actually what has been, for me, one of the most challenging things to reflect on. Not so much the public reaction, because I’ve been used to that in my work in public health, but I can tell you from my own experience, I spent a lot of time in the 2000s working overseas trying to help countries with pandemic preparedness plans. One of the things we never practiced is what happens if the president or prime minister refuses to believe this is a problem.

**EK:** At the very beginning of the book, I write about this amazing story where there’s a company called Princess Cruises. Within a few weeks of each other, in the beginning of 2020, the Diamond Princess left port in Tokyo and the Grand Princess left port in San Francisco, and a few days after they left, passengers got COVID on both ships. In Japan, they turned the ship around. They brought the ship back into the harbor. They sent a bunch of epidemiologists on board. They quarantined. They explained to everyone on board what was happening and why they were being quarantined. They did a bunch of research to try to figure out how the disease was spreading. They carefully brought people back onto land and got people treated when they needed to be treated. It was hard and they messed up some stuff, but they learned a tremendous amount from that experience.

For instance, they learned about the fact that you could be an asymptomatic carrier. They learned that air circulation really mattered. These were some big things that affected Japan’s policymaking from then on, and Japan shared that with the world. Japan, by the way, is one of those countries that had just tremendous performance in terms of its public health. It started taking the pandemic seriously on day one.

Many of you might remember what happened in the U.S. The president refused to let the ship come back into the port. This is where he says, “I like the numbers where they are. I don’t need 1,000 sick people coming on shore and messing up my numbers.” It was outrageous, but it was also a kind of preview of the whole response, where for months there’s a refusal to believe this is real, a refusal to take it seriously, and a refusal to do something. That’s a very different way of responding to a crisis than the way Japan responded.
